On March 3rd, 1972,
humanity sent out a message. A golden
plaque attached to two spacecraft that
would leave our solar system and travel
for millions of years.
A plaque that contained a message for
aliens.
It was designed by Carl Sean and NASA.
Designed so that one day beings who did
not understand our language could ask,
"What does it say? Where did it come
from? and who could have sent it and
they would get an answer. This is the
story about how humans talk to aliens
and the message NASA wants them to see.
[Music]
Carl Sean had a problem. He had helped
design the Mariner program, NASA's first
attempt at exploring the inner planets.
But not everything had gone to plan.
Mariner 1 was destroyed after launch due
to a software error. A missing hyphen in
the code caused one of the most
expensive single character related
errors in history.
Mariner 3 failed to deploy its solar
panels and antennas.
Mariner 4 did reach Mars for the first
time. But that same year, the National
Academy of Sciences said it was
reasonable for the red planet to host
living organisms.
All Mariner 4 sent back were blurry
images of a small part of the planet
covered in black and white craters more
similar to our moon than Earth.
It was a world that was dead.
Mariner 8 was scattered across the
ocean. It lasted all of 5 minutes before
a failed circuit in the rocket brought
it crashing back to Earth.
Disappointment at the mixed success of
the Mariner probes, the escalating cost
of the Apollo program, and the Vietnam
War, excitement for space was waning.
But then Mariner 9 arrived at the red
planet successfully. It was the first
time humanity orbited another planet.
They had beaten the Soviets, but the
achievement was short-lived.
Mars was covered in dust. It was
supposed to show the planet in a new
light, but Mariner 4's dead images
seemed accurate.
However, there were some who had
theorized that Mars' seasonal color
changes were not caused by vegetation or
water, but by sandstorms. And Sean was
right. When the dust cleared, the world
watched. ancient dry river beds,
volcanoes, canyons, and channels. It was
the first real site of an alien planet.
While some Mariner probes were failures,
Mariner 9 was a historic achievement.
Sean got the world's attention, but that
success created his problem.
Enthusiasm to go much further.
In the mid 1960s, the aerospace engineer
Gary Flandro was working at NASA's Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, and he discovered
something. Roughly once every 175 years,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune
aligned on the same side of the sun, a
narrow chance to reach them all. So NASA
formed a working group to explore
launching multiple probes to the outer
planets on a grand tour before that
175-year window closed. But they weren't
going to launch multiple spacecraft that
were guaranteed to fail. They needed to
make sure that at least one could
survive the asteroid belt and the
intense radiation of Jupiter. They
needed a pioneer. The Jupiter Pioneers
were built by TRW Systems of Roondo
Beach, California under contract to
NASA's Ames Research Center. The project
involved some 25 million man hours of
meticulous work by the government
industry university pioneer team.
>> It would be the first spacecraft to fly
beyond Mars, the first to get through
the asteroid belt, and the first to fly
past Jupiter. Eventually, it go fast
enough to be the first to be placed on a
trajectory to leave the solar system
entirely.
For Eric Burgess, this was an
opportunity. Pioneer 10 was our first
letter to the stars. Can't we attach a
message to it should it ever be
discovered by an alien life, he thought.
Excited, he brought it up to Richard
Hogland and Don Bane. They in turn
brought it up to Sean and he agreed.
than NASA accepted.
But the idea was easier than action. How
do we communicate to beings worlds
apart? How do we tell them when and
where we came from? What is a human
actually?
And could he figure out the answer to
those questions in only 3 weeks?
He and Dr. Frank Drake would design the
message. Linda Salsman, his wife, would
prepare the final artwork for NASA.
The message had to be easy to construct
and strong.
It had to handle space for potentially
hundreds of millions of years, and it
had to be small and light enough so that
it didn't interfere with the rest of the
spacecraft.
So, aluminum with gold anodization was
chosen to make it more resistant.
It was a small but strong canvas.
By early February, the three began
answering the questions.
Humans vary in appearance. To represent
all of us, each choice could show bias.
So, Linda drew ambiguously. A man and
woman, adult, but of an indeterminant
age and ethnicity.
I wanted to give the best proportions I
could do, and that was the inspiration.
I wanted each figure to have different
racial features.
The woman has very almond eyes and
straight hair. And I made the man's hair
curly. I made his nose kind of flattened
so that they were multicultural that
they had different human
characteristics.
>> The man's arm is raised in a universal
terrestrial greeting. It shows off our
fingers, opposable thumbs, and movable
arms.
If both raised their hands, it could
falsely indicate this pose as a
fundamental part of the human body.
They couldn't hold hands since that
would risk it being mistaken as one
being.
Paying homage to Greek sculptures, they
were drawn in the nude. It showed humans
did not reproduce asexually with belly
buttons and reproductive organs. Despite
being us, the team worried about the
reception.
>> So, I was torn. There were only so many
days, I think like 5 days until the
plaque could be put on the spacecraft.
And Carl, he said, "Don't do anything
because we don't want to get into a big
fight with NASA and give anybody an
excuse not to put the plaque on the
spacecraft."
>> The design lacked a line. The woman
basically didn't have a vagina, and that
was because Sean was worried that NASA
would reject it. Who knows what could
have happened?
But his concerns were unfortunately
justified.
>> NASA was very sensitive to this because
there were some members of Congress who
in the American Congress who were very
conservative
um and they were offended that the
taxpayers money was being used to send
smut to space.
>> Images of the plaque made headlines. For
many, it was the first time naked humans
were seen in newspapers.
>> I had the personal experience of
discussing this on a national morning
television show in Canada.
And when I was through describing it, I
looked around and everybody in the room
was horrified.
I said, "What's wrong?" He said, "Oh,
we're all going to be fired. We're going
to lose our jobs. This is the first time
a naked human has ever been shown on
Canadian television and it's forbidden.
>> Despite the criticism, Linda's
interstellar nudes pushed through. But
with the deadline looming and so many
moving pieces, they couldn't afford to
wait. The team had to take risks.
Decisions that were critical to the
mission success.
Today's businesses face the same
challenges. UDO is an all-in-one
management software that offers a wide
range of applications designed for
day-to-day business management. If
you're a diverse team with a big idea,
you don't have time to waste on
expensive apps that aren't integrated
with access to over 45 easy to use
applications in one ecosystem. You can
meet all your needs without friction.
Easily keep track of your accounting,
communicate quickly with your team, or
manage manufacturing orders. Sean might
have appreciated that. Get one software
that does it all. You don't need to wait
for the planets to align. Get your first
application free for life with unlimited
hosting and support. And simply add more
as you grow with full access to the
suite of apps starting at just €19.90
per month. Try Udu now by visiting
udu.com/r/hoo.
Language on Earth is complicated.
There are thousands, even more regional
variations.
Instead of words, they needed something
universal. 1 + 1 always equals 2. It
will be on Earth, on Mars, or circling
an alien sun thousands of light years
away. But a number can be denoted by an
infinite amount of symbols. Sean and
Drake needed something simpler. Binary
can represent any number as an
increasingly long string of ones and
zeros. Instead of 10 individual symbols,
binary just needs two, one and zero, or
a vertical and horizontal dash.
One of the shortest strings of vertical
and horizontal dashes is next to the
woman. Since there are four digits, the
string can be read from left to right. 1
0 0
2 raised to the power of three on the
rest off. 8. But 8 what? Drake and Sean
had narrowed how to count, but they
needed a universal measurement. And
luckily, they had one. Hydrogen is the
simplest element. One proton, one
electron. It makes up 75% of all matter
in the universe. When the electron in a
neutral hydrogen atom changes its spin
state, it produces a photon in the form
of a radio wave. It has a wavelength of
21 cm.
Since hydrogen is widespread across the
universe, the strength and direction of
this radio wave can help locate large
hydrogen clouds and map the structure of
the universe. Sean and Drake assume that
any advanced alien society would know
this wavelength. On the plaque, the two
circles represent the two states of
hydrogen. The pin on the outside
indicates a single electron flipping
directions relative to the single
proton. Between the two states is a
single binary symbol. This wavelength is
what Sean and Drink wanted the aliens to
be counting.
8 times the wavelength is 168 cm, 5' 6
in, the average height of humans.
The figures are drawn in front of the
Pioneer spacecraft relative to scale,
allowing the reader to check their work.
And if they could communicate the length
of humans, they could scale it up to the
level of the universe.
Pioneer 10 was launched towards the eye
of Taurus. It would take 2 million years
to reach our neighbors in Al Debron.
Pioneer 11 was shot in the opposite
direction towards the Scutum
constellation.
It could arrive at the closest main star
in 4 million years.
In order to find Earth in the vast scale
of our galaxy, they needed a galactic
scale form of triangulation.
[Music]
After a supernova, stars can leave
behind a tiny powerful neutron star,
pulsars.
They emit high energy particles at each
magnetic pole.
This causes a unique, predictable, and
visible pulse of radiation when they
rotate. They're a cosmic lighthouse.
Bright and have lifespans measured in
tens of millions of years. Drake picked
out some of the longest living and
brightest.
Although triangulation can be achieved
with as few as three, Drake included 14.
It was more than what was needed, but
there were still some issues. Pulsars
are found in three dimensions. The
plaque has only two.
This cluster of radio lines is a map of
the nearest pulsars from our sun. They
did X and Y, but they needed a Z. So
Drake added a 15th line. This line
represents the distance from the center
of the galaxy. The galactic plane. When
the angle between the galactic plane and
the pulsar is positive, the star is
above the galactic plane. Negative, it's
below. The length of each of the pulsars
lines relative to the galactic plane
produces a relative distance to the sun
and the center of the galaxy. But the
pulsar map actually had one more
dimension. Since pulsars gradually
decrease in frequency at a predictable
rate over time, Sean and Drake's map
could be used to determine the age of
the spacecraft.
However, they could narrow down our
location even more.
Planets lying in the habitable zones of
solar systems are fairly common, but our
system has a rare configuration. Four
small rocky planets near the sun with
four larger gas giants further out, an
ordered system.
At the bottom of the plaque is our
unique solar system. The line to the
sixth planet represents Saturn's rings,
Pluto at the end. The launch of Pioneer
coincided with the brief cosmic blip in
our history where Pluto was still
considered a planet. And they hadn't
figured out that Saturn wasn't the only
one with rings. Either way, it didn't
matter. The diagram told the readers
that our solar system has roughly nine
planets with the binary indicating the
distance from our sun.
Here, however, they made a decision
under the constraint of time. Earth is
about 148 million km from the sun. They
would need a binary string of 40 digits
to indicate the distance and they didn't
have enough space. By midFebruary, Drake
had finished calculating the binary
values for the 14 pulsar maps which left
the planetary distances on the back
burner. So they rushed. They replaced
the existing dashes with seraps capped
at the end like a capital I. It was a
sloppy but new value 1/10 the semi-
major axis orbit of Mercury or about 5.7
million km.
It wouldn't be possible to determine
this value without examining our solar
system. But still, the combination of
the planetary system and the pulsar map
were a good enough hint. However, they
made one more controversial
anthropocentric decision. A line drawn
from the third planet indicates the
spacecraft's rough path tipped with an
arrow. Whether the arrow was a universal
symbol or primarily a human one is left
an open question.
By the end of February, they were out of
time. The diagrams were edged.1 mm deep
to remain readable even after
micrometeorite damage.
It was mounted in reverse on the antenna
support faced inward to reduce damage.
According to Sean, the message finally
agreed upon is in our view an adequate
but hardly ideal solution to the
problem.
Pioneer 10 launched on March 3rd, 1972.
Pioneer 10 waits for launch at top a new
three-stage version of the Atlas Centaur
rocket.
>> And Pioneer 11 launched a year later on
April 6th, 1973.
Like the Mariner program before it,
there was concern about whether each
spacecraft would even make it to
Jupiter, let alone interstellar space.
But by February of 1973, Pioneer 10
emerged from the asteroid belt. By
November, color renderings of Jupiter
were returned in almost real time to
Earth. It captured the first close-up
images of the Jovian icy moons.
>> Now, the pull of Jupiter's gravity
speeds it up to a fantastic 82,000 mph.
In effect, this crack the whip left turn
gives Pioneer another rocket stage to
fling it out of the solar system.
>> It reached Uranus in 1979 and passed the
orbit of Neptune on June 13th, 1983.
It was the first man-made object to head
to the stars. By the conservative
metrics of NASA, both missions were a
success. As far as anyone can tell, they
still continue forward. The plaques were
only a small part of that success, a 3we
afterthought. Sean may not have thought
their message was ideal, but luckily he
was given another chance.